----------------------
Running BLASTs on UNIX
----------------------

Day 2 (wed): run BLAST & estimate time to run; parse files into CSV, and tweak output; do simple homology/orthology analysis; do more complicated hom/orth stuff; put print statements in scripts.

More expert/independent stuff: count numbers of homology/orthology.  protein vs DNA.  modify scripts for three-way or transitive.  Install/use BioPython.  Posting data files on the Web.  Shell scripting.

For later days: histogram graph homology/orthology stuff.

Introduction
------------

OK, your first introduction to the use and abuse of command line tools
is... BLAST!  That's right, the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool!

I'm going to assume that all of you have used the NCBI BLAST Web page
to do individual searches.  Today we'll show you how to go through and
do batch searches at the command line on your own computer.  This is a
technique that works well for small-to-medium sized searches, for
example, one transcriptome against another.  The various database (nr,
nt) are getting big enough that it's reasonably time consuming to
search them on your own, although of course you can do it if you want
-- you might just have to wait a while for things to finish.

Before I forget, let me say that there are a lot of tips and tricks
for working at the UNIX command line that I'm going to show you, so
even if you've used command line BLAST before, you should skim along.

First, install BLAST.  XXX

Now, download the databases.  Let's start by doing a BLAST of mouse
against zebrafish, to detect putative homology.  For this you'll need
the mouse refseq protein db, here, and the zebrafish refseq protein
db, here.  Use curl to retrieve them:

 %% curl -O ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/M_musculus/mRNA_Prot/mouse.protein.faa.gz
 %% curl -O ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/refseq/D_rerio/mRNA_Prot/zebrafish.protein.faa.gz

This downloads the files into the current working directory from the
given FTP site, naming the files for the last part of the path
(e.g. 'mouse.protein.faa.gz').  You can do this from any Web or FTP
address.

Now you've got these files.  How big are they?

 %% ls -l *.faa.gz

About 9.6 mb for the mouse protein set, and 8.8 mb for the zebrafish protein
set.

Are these files you can work with?  Well, no -- they're actually compressed,
in the gzip format.  Do

 %% gunzip *.faa.gz

to uncompress them.

Type

  %% less mouse.protein.faa

to display the beginning of the mouse file in a pager (something that
will let you scroll down through the file).  Type 'q' to exit from the
pager before the end of the file.

OK, we've got the databases, but BLAST requires that each subject
database be preformatted for use; this is a way of speeding up certain
types of searches.  To do this, do

%% formatdb -i zebrafish.protein.faa -o T -p T
%% formatdb -i mouse.protein.faa -o T -p T

The -i parameter gives the name of the database, the -o parameter says
"save the results", and the -p parameter says "this is a protein
database".  For DNA, you'd want to use '-p F', or false.

We couldn't use '*' here as a way to specify both files because
formatdb's '-i' option takes only one filename, and '*.faa' expands
into two files (see globbing, @CTB).

Before we do a BLAST of all mouse protein against all zebrafish protein,
though, let's make sure our blast is working!  To do this, we want to
start with something small.  Let's take a few sequences off the top of
the mouse protein set:

  %% head mouse.protein.faa > mm-first.fa

Here, the program 'head' takes the first ten lines from that file, and
the '>' tells UNIX to put them into another file, 'mm-first.fa'.  A couple
notes here:

 - UNIX generally doesn't care what the file is called, so '.faa' and '.fa'
   are all the same to it.

 - UNIX utilities work well with text files, and almost everything you'll
   encounter is a basic text file.  This is different from Windows and Mac,
   where more complicated formats are used that can't be as easily dealt with
   on UNIX.

 - here's a useful command-line tip, by the way: you can use Tab to do
   filename completion.  For example, if you type 'head mou<Tab>' it will
   fill out the word after 'mou' by looking in the current directory for
   files starting with 'mou' and then filling in after it.  In bash (the
   UNIX shell that you're all using) if there are multiple files that
   start with mou, it won't fill in but will rather beep -- hit Tab again
   to see what the options are.

Now try a BLAST:

  %% blastall -i mm-first.fa -d zebrafish.protein.faa -p blastp

...and whoops, it's done!  And it probably scrolled off your screen...

You can do three things at this point.  First, you can scroll up in your
ssh window to look at the output.  Second, you can save the output to a
file:

  %% blastall -i mm-first.fa -d zebrafish.protein.faa -p blastp -o out.txt

and then use 'less' to look at it:

  %% less out.txt

and third, you can pipe it directly to less, by which I mean you can send
all of the output to the 'less' command without saving it to a file:

  %% blastall -i mm-first.fa -d zebrafish.protein.faa -p blastp | less

If you do any or all of these, you'll see that you've done a BLAST!  It's
got the typical output, it's got a bunch of matches, etc.  And if you scroll
down enough, you can see that you've actually done TWO BLASTs -- because
there are *two* sequences in mm-first.fa.

.. @@ different BLAST options, etc.

---

Now let's do a BLAST of all mouse RefSeq proteins against all
zebrafish RefSeq proteins:

% blastall -i mouse.protein.faa -d zebrafish.protein.faa -o results.txt -p blastp

...and wait.  A loooong time.  (Take a look at your watch and write
down the time, while you're at it.)

You could get up and take a coffee break, but If you're impatient,
like me, you don't want to get up every time a computer takes a few
minutes to do something.  For one thing, you want to know how long
it's going to take.  For another thing, maybe you want to do more on
that computer!

There are a couple of things you can do at this point to check on the
status and estimate how long it's going to take to do the BLAST.

1. Open up another window and log into the computer that way.  Now
type 'top'.  This will show you what's currently running on the
computer. 

2. Or, hit CTRL-Z and then type 'bg'.  This will put the BLAST into
the background, telling to run while you're doing other things at the
command line.  You can look to see what's running in the background on
this shell with 'jobs', or type 'fg' to go back to it (and then
CTRL-Z/bg again to background out of it).  In this case, there's no
reason to return to it -- it will just exit when it's done running.

OK, now look at the output file.  Try typing 'less results.txt'.  What
do you see?  That's right, a bunch of BLAST output!  We'll show you
how to work with it in a bit, but for now, we just want to see how
many BLAST records there are.  The simplest way to do that is to
search for something that's unique to each record.  There are at least
two things that are unique to each BLAST record.  One is the string
'Query=', and the other is 'BLAST' starting at the beginning of a
line.

In both situations, you'll want to search for lines containing that
record, and then count them.  To do the first, you can do

%% grep ^BLAST results.txt

Here the carat is part of something called a "regular expression"
which lets you specify mismatches or wildcards in strings to find -- ^
means "find the text BLAST immediately after the beginning of the
line."

This will spit out a lot of results; hit CTRL-C to stop it.

OK, now, we want to count them.  You can do this by sending (piping)
the results of the grep to another program, 'wc', which counts lines.

% grep ^BLAST results.txt | wc

This will report three numbers: the number of lines, the number of
words, and the number of characters.  You're interested in the number
of lines, which is the first number.

This will tell you how many BLAST comparisons have been done.  But we
still need to figure out how many total there are to do!  Again, we
can use grep to do this:

% grep ^'>' mouse.protein.faa | wc

This will tell you how many FASTA header lines there are in the file.
(There should be 36377, or 36,000 proteins.)

OK, now, if you look at the current time, and how many have been done,
and how many are left to be done, what do you estimate is the amount
of time it will take to complete the BLAST?

That's right.  A while.

Yep, time for a cup of coffee!  Still, isn't this easier than doing
40,000 BLASTs one by one through the Web interface?

Additional: download a nt database and do appropriate BLASTs.

Advanced topics: using screen. shell scripts.

Parsing
-------

OK, so now we've got these great big honking BLAST files -- do an

%% ls -l results.txt

Pretty big file, huh?  You sure don't want to look through that line
by line, and you couldn't load it into Word if you tried.  A script,
to the rescue!

@@ script to pull out BLAST query/subject results

What can we do next?

Dumping into CSV

CSV parsing, putting into data structures, calculating putative orthology.

Why is this all important - a meditation on automation and scripting.
Debiologifying aspect of scripting.

